welcome to topcast and again today
something
slightly different at the request of a
patreon
hello aaron i'm going to
do a brief as far insofar as i can be
brief
analysis of the david deutsch
conversation
with tyler which was an excellent
tyler cohen has pushed back on david on
a few points
and i just thought it worth clarifying
perhaps
in my words some of what was being said
i'm not going to go through the entire
conversation i'm just going to stop it
at a few points i'm going to watch and
i'm going to watch it at
two times speed i think that's as fast
as i can go
on youtube because i've already watched
the conversation before
and i will let you know the time stamps
i'll provide
the clips of course as well let you know
the timestamps of
where i'm stopping and pausing just to
reflect
on what's been said so let's start i
have a question i
am myself a metaphysical agnostic so i'm
unwilling to step into a star trek
transporter machine
because i'm afraid it would kill me and
it's a copy of me that would keep on
living
at what price are you willing to step
into a star trek transporter machine
uh i certainly wouldn't want to be the
first person but i suppose
you're asking the question uh
separately from do i think it would work
technically
sure assume it works as in the tv show
but metaphysically there's a question
you face but you know you believe in
many worlds
theory right so yes though i don't think
that
is connected um i i think it's more
physicalism or something like that that
i believe that there's
there's nothing to me except
this running program in my brain
and if that program were to run
somewhere else and stop running in my
brain then i wouldn't notice anything
and i would indeed
have traveled to that other place
but say the world forks and it's
possible both that you do
and do not step into the machine isn't
it the case that some version of the
earlier you
uh is still existing along one of the
forks so you have nothing to worry about
uh some version of me
uh whenever i whenever i make a decision
which could go either way
some version of me will have presumably
made the other decision
although uh that's not as simple as it
sounds
because both the other version of me and
me are error correcting entities that's
that's the whole
point of what human thought is it's
error correction
okay so i'm stopping the video at 1
minute 43 and there's a clip here of
tyler talking to david about whether or
not
david would step into the transporter
machine or not
and this is a version of what might be
called the
quantum immortality argument something
like that and this is the argument that
if
the multiverse is true then
if you die in one universe then a copy
of you goes on to exist in the other
universe so therefore
you're immortal by some stretch of the
imagination
or whenever you make a decision in the
universe that you find yourself
versions of you are making another
decision the other decision that is
possible
in those other universes so for example
if it's the case that there's a fork in
the road and
you could have gone left but instead you
choose to go right
then there is some number of
versions of you that in fact go left
even though you yourself have gone right
and so you know if there's you know if
there's the demon at the end of
the track to the left then aren't you
condemning versions of yourself
to the demon that's going to attack you
at the end of the left
forked road if you take the road to the
right
which is similar to this whole idea of
the transporter you know why worry about
getting into a transporter if
it doesn't really matter what the
outcome is after all if it's possible
that you survive the transporter then
you will
survive the transporter now as david
goes on to say
this is a misconception about what the
nature of decisions
are in the multiverse you are you
and you have knowledge and in
this universe right now there are
versions of you which haven't yet
differentiated as david will come to say
that's another point of
clarification that we're going to need
to get to but the reason that you make
the decisions that you do
is not virtually flipping a coin it's
not probabilistic
it's not random the reason you make the
decisions that you do is you deliberate
and deliberate on what the knowledge
that you have the evidence before you
all that sort of stuff
so if you are actually literally walking
along a road
and it forks into different directions
let's consider the realistic case of
what's going on
well why are you walking along the road
in first place maybe it's that
you've just been to the shops and you're
coming home and the road ahead of you
falls into two different places
to the right is your home to the left is
the neighbouring town
you don't want to go to the neighbouring
town you want to go to the right
and so you choose to go to the right and
you find your way home again
in the overwhelming majority of
universes in the multiverse
all versions of you do precisely that
because they've got your knowledge
they're thinking about precisely the
same things that you're thinking about
they are
fungible instances of you now yes
there is some measure a much smaller
measure presumably
of versions of you that coming to the
fork in the road
have the idea for reasons i don't know
that decide you don't want to go home
even though you're carrying
bags of shopping that are quite heavy
and the distance to the next town along
that left
fork in the road is some kilometers away
which is going to make the journey
arduous
but maybe you remember in fact along
that left fork road that's where you
were
yesterday when you lost your iphone and
maybe it's still along that track and so
you think ah
i better go that way but in the
overwhelming majority of universes in
which you didn't
lose your iphone you're going to
continue off
to the right in order to get home now
are you condemning some proportion of
versions of you to go to the left isn't
there a chance at some will yes
there is a chance but it is a
infinitesimally small chance
presumably depending upon what the
situation entails and as
david is saying here with the
transporter
he has knowledge and his knowledge tells
him that he doesn't understand enough
about the transporter
this thought experiment is stepping into
the transporter
to be able to reassure him sufficiently
that he should indeed step into the
transporter
and that's him that's david deutsch so
although some versions of him might step
into the transporter
and survive or not he's not going to
take that chance
the way to think about people and
decisions in the multiverse is not to
presume that you just do
absolutely everything with equal
probability or an equal measure we say
you do far more frequently across the
multiverse we would see
the proportion of the universes in which
you
do precisely what you do based upon your
personality and knowledge
that's the thing that happens more often
this other thing
that you tend not to do tends not to
happen in the multiverse
even though it does if it's physically
possible
both the other version of me and me are
error correcting entities
that's that's the whole point of what
human thought is it's error correction
therefore
it will take more than just a cosmic ray
hit
to make the difference between uh
deciding something yes or no
so this would have to be like an
inconsequential decision
which unbeknownst to me will have a
large effect and then later cause me to
um be a different person and so on and
that's happening all the time
independently of star trek machines or
anything like that
that is the case and uh fortunately
it turns out uh at least if
if ordinary decision theory is true in
in
like non-quantum cases then it turns out
that
ordinary decision theory with randomness
uh produces the same rational decisions
as quantum decision theory with
uh the multiverse so it shouldn't make
any difference to decisions and that
includes
the decision whether to use the star
trek transporter
sure so as long as there's a possible
world where your atoms aren't scattered
and you just
didn't get into the machine you don't
have to worry too much about your
decision
i do because when you say so long as
there's a possible world
that glides over the question
how many what proportion of the worlds
is that going to happen in
and the this what i said just now about
um uh about decision theory in the
multiverse
uh the proportion of the multiverse that
does one thing or another plays the same
role in decisions
as probability does in
a theory where there's randomness
so it really does matter and just
because there are a few worlds in which
x y or z happens
if they're very few of them they
shouldn't affect my decisions at all
uh yes so this this idea here of error
correction is what i was
trying to sort of get at because
you and all versions of you are error
correcting entities
they're going to be correcting the
errors in the same way
broadly speaking having the same
knowledge correcting the same errors
and so therefore a greater proportion
weight
of them if you will number of universes
we should say measure
is going to do precisely what you do and
so
this proportion of people that make a
different decision to you
is exceedingly small you still the
meaning of personhood within the
multiverse
is that the person has a
large measure of universes representing
them in comparison to
versions of themselves that are doing
something completely at random so to
speak or because of a
cosmic ray hits okay this is not the
reason why we choose to do
something completely different the
reason why we would choose to do
something completely different
something that's out of character let's
say it's because we have an explanation
as to why we would do that thing because
we're trying to correct an error
that we've hit the two had should also
add here that
there is confusion about probability on
the multiverse version of reality which
is the multiverse version of reality
says
if it's physically possible then it's
going to happen now
that's not quite the same as saying it's
going to happen with the same measure
across
all of the universes after all creating
knowledge is not something that
happens by happenstance and by chance
people have to deliberately go out and
make the choice
to create the knowledge nevertheless
this doesn't mean that things probably
happen anywhere
in reality things either happen or they
don't happen
the reality is the multiverse so what
happens
happens and that's that but for any
given
person they occupying not the entirety
of the multiverse but just a
small part of it and so subjectively
they cannot predict with perfect
precision what's going to happen next so
subjectively
it seems like there's a probability
about things they
flip a coin it must necessarily land
heads or tails
but if you had a god's eye view of the
multiverse
or if you just simply have an
understanding of quantum theory then you
know
that the coin must land heads and
details but the observer will only see
one of these they can't see
two they can't see both although
versions of them
will see both heads or tails okay
in other words heads and tails actually
happens in the universe it doesn't
happen with chance one half it's just in
the proportion
of the universes in which it lands heads
approximately
fifty percent the proportion of
universes in which it lands tails
approximately fifty percent
but the probability that it lands heads
and tails is one
it always is whatever physically can
happen indeed
will happen so probability is subjective
on this view
and and this is why you know david says
that this notion of probability serves
the same role
as proportionality amongst the universes
because
we are subjects we are subjects who
create knowledge and we don't have this
god's eye view
of the universe we don't know which
universe we're going to
end up in next with absolute certainty
and so we can talk reasonably about
subjectively what the probability of
things
might be and that's what decision theory
is about but we just
can't be committed to the idea that it's
objectively
true you know true as a matter of fact
that coins
land heads fifty percent of the time
they don't that's only your subjective
perspective on the multiverse
the reality is coins land heads
and tails with probability one anything
that can happen
happens with probability one which makes
the entire notion of probability
completely bankrupt because there is no
probability of something happening
or not it happens or it doesn't happen
and that's
that it's just that because you don't
occupy all of the universes you don't
know
what's going to happen next probability
is subjective
not objective not to say that physicists
tend to agree with this notion
but that doesn't matter okay lots of
people don't agree
with what the truth happens to be
doesn't matter
how do you think many worlds
interpretation of quantum mechanics
relates to the view that just in terms
of space the size of our
current universe is infinite and
therefore everything possible is
happening in it
it complicates the discussion of
probability but
it does there's there's no uh overlap
between um that notion of infinity and
the everettian
notion of infinity if if uh we are
infinite there because this the
uh differentiation as i i prefer to call
the
what used to be called splitting the the
uh when i
uh perform an experiment which can go
one of two ways
the influence of that spreads out first
i see it i may write it down i may write
a scientific paper and so
and when i write a paper about it and
report the results
that that that will cause
the journal to split or to differentiate
into
into two journals and so on and but this
influence cannot spread out faster than
the speed of light
so an everett universe
is really a misnomer because what we see
in real life is an everett
bubble within the universe everything
outside the bubble is as it was
it's undifferentiated or it's to be
exact
it's exactly as differentiated as it was
before
and then as the bubble spreads out um
the the universe becomes or the
multiverse becomes more differentiated
but the bubble is always finite
okay i'm pausing it at um 10 minutes 25
and david there is talking a little bit
about the the concept of a universe
within the
everettian picture which is in other
words the multiverse
and this idea of splitting and of course
if the situation was that at the big
bang we started with one
universe and then the universe split
into two copies and then three copies
we're getting kind of a multiplication
which seems to be a violation of the
conservation of energy
which would be true we'd be creating
universes just again and again and again
every time there was some kind of
quantum event which caused the splitting
of the universe from one universe into
two universes
um where is the additional mass coming
from where is additional energy coming
from okay
that problem is entirely solved by
rejecting this notion of splitting
and instead what we talk about is
differentiation
differentiation and this requires an
understanding of fungibility although
david doesn't mention it here this is
what is explained in the beginning of
infinity of course
the idea there being that for any object
the easiest thing to talk about is a
quantum object like well we're all
quantum ultimately there's you know the
emergent multiverse tells us that
uh the the quantum laws of physics
govern everything not just the small but
it's easy to talk about the small let's
talk about the
so-called fundamental particles in
particular the electron
when the electron could have gone left
or right
then it actually takes both paths
now in the easiest case 50 of the time
it takes
your path x and then 50 of the time it
takes pathway but doesn't need to be
that case
you know it could be any proportion that
you like you know 10 of them go to the
left and 90
go right whatever let's take the simple
case
50 50. what happens in that case is that
the the electron
prior to taking path x
and y is a multiversal object which
means
it already occupies uncountably infinite
numbers of
universes but they're all identical
and it's not until the choices then made
i'd say choice very loosely i mean
the possibility is actualized of
the universe then differentiating into
two slightly different kinds one where
this single electron
went to the left along path x and one
where it went along path
y and so and then you've got uncountably
infinite
numbers going along path x and
uncountably infinite numbers going along
pathwide
that's a 50 50 differentiation of the
universes no new universes have been
created
there was an infinite number before and
there's an infinite number after
along both paths and you just trace that
back in time to the beginning of the
universe where you've
already got an infinite number an
uncountably infinite number of fungible
universes that then differentiate
differentiate differentiate
every single time there's a possibility
a physical possibility
of them differentiating in such a way
now the level of
the level of the quantum what's going on
is you're having these
possibilities of differentiation because
of the quantum laws of physics
and at the entire emergent level as
we've already talked about with decision
making when people create knowledge then
and larger proportions of universes
end up persisting through time those
universes where
knowledge is being created and knowledge
tends to get itself replicated over time
in a larger proportion of universes than
where it doesn't and so david
also says there that um universe is kind
of a misnomer
in this everett understanding of quantum
theory it probably does
a bit of a disservice to the entire
understanding of realistic quantum
mechanics
and it's probably sent a lot of
physicists down a bit
of a misconceived alley and might be one
of the reasons among
many you know david's going to get to
this about why they reject
the multiverse because of this very
notion that
we use the word universe and the
universe is supposed to mean
cosmologically speaking
something that could be in theory
spatially
infinite and so just there is no bound
to the universe it's just
it goes on forever in all directions
that's not what we're talking about here
we're talking about a bubble a sphere of
differentiation so that if you do an
interference
experiment in a particular place you
know you do the double sid experiment
then what's going on in that case across
the multiverse is differentiation which
spreads out at the speed of light the
information about
how the universe has changed locally
here
begins to spread out at the speed of
light and you end up getting all these
mini bubble universes inside of the
universe which is yet to be
differentiated yet to be differentiated
and this is explained um quite well by
david wallace as well in the
emergent multiverse how do your views
relate to
the philosophical modal realism of david
lewis
uh it there are interesting parallels
um uh
as a physicist i'm interested in what
the laws of physics
tell us is so rather than
in uh philosophical reasoning about
things unless they impinge on a problem
that i have
so yes i'm interested in for example the
continuity of
the self you know whether whether if
there's another
version of me uh a very large number of
light years away in an infinite universe
whether whether and it's identical is
that really me
are there two of me that one of me um
i don't entirely know the answer to that
and
it it's why i don't entirely know the
answer to
whether i would go in a star trek
transporter
but the modal realism certainly involves
a lot of things that i don't think
exist at least not physically
i'm open to the idea that non-physical
things do exist
like the natural numbers i think
exist there's a difference between uh
you know the second even prime which
doesn't exist
and uh the the the infinite number of
prime numbers which i think do exist um
uh so i i think that that
um there is more than one mode of
existence
but the theory that all modes of
are equally real i see no
point in that so the overlap between
everett
and david lewis is i think
more coincidental than than
illuminating now tyler's asked david
there about
um david lewis david lewis wrote
on the plurality of worlds
and i've talked about this before in my
own multiverse series
um well david lewis's uh
notion of other world
is a purely metaphysical notion okay he
was purely
philosophizing in the abstract largely
but he believed in the realism of
logically possible other universes of
which the
physically possible ones the multiverse
is just a
tiny tiny subset but of course the
physically possible ones are
the scientific ones they're the ones we
know about
by conjecture and experiment
so this is different too just imagining
universes into existence which is what
david lewis did so it's the difference
between
the metaphysical that's david lewis's
version of the many worlds
and everett's purely physical
version of the many worlds that's the
difference philosophy versus physics to
a large extent
so if the universe is infinite and if
david lewis is correct
should i feel closer to the david lewis
copies of me
the copies are near copies of me in this
universe
or the near copies of me in the
multiverse it seems
very crowded all of a sudden so
something that whose purpose was
to be economical uh doesn't
feel that way to me by the end of the
metaphysics
it doesn't feel like that to you well
how as
wittgenstein is supposed to have said i
don't know whether he really did
if it were true what would it feel like
it would so after
13 minutes um uh tyler
talks about the multiverse not feeling
correct and so david quite rightly says
they're
basically well what should it feel like
okay
you know and then wittgenstein has this
thing which um in fact again
to go back to david wallace emergent
multiverse you know uh
what would it what would it look like if
it looked like
the earth went round the sun okay what
would it look like
i've got because lots of people say of
course that it looks like the sun goes
around
the earth which it does but what would
it look like if it looked like
the earth went around the sun and of
course it looks exactly the way that it
does
what about the alternative view that
it's a big sprawling mess
we're not capable of understanding an
integrated theory
there's maybe some darwinian principle
operating across some different kind of
multiverse
our universe persists just because it
works well enough
a bit like a bad used car we're never
going to grasp it there's not a unified
theory
and here we are but take the
incomprehensibility of
the universe and possibly multiverse so
we would both agree
it's incomprehensible to your cat right
sorry it's incomprehensible to your cat
or to the local raccoon yes but
everything is incomprehensible to a cat
i don't think that's true
no dogs understand human socialism they
do know well
dogs have genes which
uh contain knowledge but it is fixed
knowledge and it is not the kind of
knowledge that constitutes understanding
understanding is always explanatory so
you know you can write a book on on
canine behavior and look in chapter 37
and it will tell you what a dog will do
when such and such uh happens to it
and sometimes it will say some dogs will
do this
some dogs will do that um there is no
such book
for humans because chapter 37 will be
blank
it'll it'll say humans are going to do
something that neither we nor you can
predict
okay at 14 minutes we've got
tyler asking about whether or not the
universe is incomprehensible and we've
got this thing here about well
you know the cat doesn't understand the
universe the the dog doesn't understand
the universe so why should we expect
that we are much better at all this is
this very very common misconception
neil degrasse tyson has been doing a
great job of pushing this recently oh
you won't he won't let go of it
therefore i won't let go of it this idea
that we're just on the continuum of
intelligence with everything else
and some things can understand the
universe to a greater or lesser extent
maybe the dog understands things a
little bit better than
what the insects do which understand
better than what the bacteria does but
this is all
a complete and utter misconception those
animals
don't understand anything they might
have some knowledge
but the knowledge is there encoded in
their genes the knowledge of how to
behave
they can only behave in such a way that
the genes permit them to
but that's not us our genes do not
contain
information about making podcasts or
about
building rockets and going to the moon
that's not in our genes
but anything that a dog does you would
be able to find within its genes
okay even if it's playing with a ball
the gene for chasing things around would
be there somewhere or other to pursue
something
but there's nothing like that when it
comes to explanatory knowledge
being able to take the laws of nature
and to model them inside of our own
minds that's not in the genes
that is done via a completely different
mechanism it's not
fixed it's not fixed it's open to
open-ended improvement progress error
correction of course that's what
explanatory knowledge allows us to do
a human mind is completely unlike
anything that the brain of a dog is able
to do
or any other animal for that matter i
feel i can predict humans better than
cats often
but do chimpanzees understand in your
view
no one knows um uh they they
they show virtually no
sign of understanding anything there
there are some really nice experiments
um on wild gorillas by
uh richard byrne who's um uh
both a theoretical and um
and very practical animal behavior
expert
and he was wondering how gorillas
transmit their memes that is their
culturally inherited behaviors
from one gorilla to another so one thing
is
the first answer is very slowly it takes
absolutely ages months and months for
a gorilla to be able to copy
another gorilla's behavior well enough
to do something complicated i mean they
can copy
uh you know uh wave hand and that sort
of thing
but to to copy a complex behavior like
required to open a difficult kind of nut
which uh no other animal can open this
is why they have memes because that's a
very useful ability
um it takes them a long time and then
he did some ingenious experiments
um or rather observations he he didn't
he didn't interfere with the
with the uh gorillas he did some
observations
um to to try to determine whether they
understand
why they are doing each particular
action
and you know it involves uh you know i
don't know what it involves grabbing
with both hands and twisting in one way
and then pulling another way and then so
on
apparently these guerrillas are prone to
a certain injury
which disables their thumb and so they
can't move their thumb which is which is
you know
quite disabling for them just as it is
for us
and the thing is when you've disabled
your thumb one of these
motions becomes irrelevant and the
others become less effective
but the gorillas which have learned how
to do the thing
will make the motion the ineffective
motion
again and again every single time and
uh he explains this better than i do but
that's like human beings borrowing at
high interest rates right
they'll do that many many times it's not
just like it uh you know you you might
like to draw analogies
but it's not the same thing when a
human being repeats a
behavior that another human being thinks
is
um unwise or counterproductive or will
not achieve its purpose
and you ask them or you show them
they will have an explanation which you
might not like
it may be stupid but the ape
perfectly well wants this thing to work
but doesn't know why it is
doing the actions and david mentions
richard byrne who did experiments on
chimpanzees or gorillas i think and
the the concept there is behavior
passing again there's nothing
particularly impressive about these
creatures
unless you're easily impressed okay and
you think that
having a repertoire of a few hundred
words is good
but again they're not explaining
anything they're not
bringing new knowledge into the world
they're not conjecturing
explanations it's not like we're just
another
rung on this continual ladder to ever
greater intelligence
that's not what's going on here we are
qualitatively different
we are off axis as i like to say we are
on
a different ladder and that ladder is
something that we can climb unlike with
the chimpanzee whatever its intelligence
is
is fixed and insofar as we have
intelligence that has to do with what
knowledge we have and we can improve the
knowledge that we have
and we can improve the ways in which we
create knowledge over time as well
unlike chimpanzees gorillas dogs etc
and of course the the other thing that i
need to say at this point is
our knowledge has this capacity
for universality our minds do
what that means is that we can model
anything
that's out there in the universe in
abstract space
in physical space we can come to a
greater understanding of it
and although tyler will raise the
objection that many people do
which is that there just might be
something that's incomprehensible that's
beyond us to understand i think
later on he's going to bring up the
distribution of prime numbers
um or even how certain engines work but
this is just a
i i i think it's an appeal to uh
personal disinterest in those things
if he spent time and tried to solve the
problem then perhaps he could come to a
deeper understanding personally of these
things and some people do have a good
understanding of these things
for example how electric motors work or
how internal combustion engines work
some people do some people don't it just
depends on what
your area of interest is the fact that i
can't understand
how to play the piano at all let alone
complicated pieces
does not mean my mind isn't universal if
i was to sit down and really apply
myself i wouldn't want to i'd have to be
coerced into doing it
then i could but the fact that i don't
have an understanding of how to play the
piano
does not change the fact my mind is
still universal
it's like saying that my computer isn't
a universal computer
simply because it's not being used right
now in order to play a computer game
it's making a podcast instead we do one
thing at a time when we take interest in
certain things and not interest in other
things this is not a refutation of
the universality of our minds
and of course the best refutation of all
of this stuff
this idea that we just might not
understand
something or the laws of physics they
might be incomprehensible the universe
might ultimately be incomprehensible
it's nothing bad as david says perfectly
logically equivalent to believing in god
and the atheists out there who think
that they
are somehow being rational in rejecting
god
while simultaneously thinking only the
aliens are capable of understanding the
laws of physics or
no one ultimately is capable of
understanding the ultimate laws of
physics
is precisely the same as believing in
god god just is this thing that stands
for
there's something ultimate out there
that we can't possibly understand
it's beyond our mind we're replacing
that with well the laws of physics are
ultimately this thing that we can't
understand and there's beyond the
capacity
of humans to comprehend all the aliens
are
or the artificial general intelligence
or the super intelligence is
all of these things are just logically
equivalent and you can go down that road
but you believe in the supernatural
that's all you're just changing the
labels
instead of saying you believe in god
you're saying
i believe in the ultimate laws of
physics being incomprehensible
in the same way that the theists believe
that the omniscient omnipotent creator
of the universe
is too much for puny human minds to
understand
you can go that way you're all in the
same category according to us
we're we're the ones who are saying no
it's all comprehensible
eventually not right now at any given
point in time there will be open
mysteries open problems and isn't that
great because that gives us
fun excitement and interest in the
universe but it is eventually
all comprehensible it just takes time
and effort to
keep on trying to find more and more
answers
but if you want to sit there and on the
sidelines and say no
this thing x is the thing that we can't
possibly understand where x is
god or the laws of physics or the super
aliens fine
we disagree okay because he the two the
reason why we've been able to explain
things is because we've got these
universal minds
that can explain anything that can be
understood
which is everything and the only
refutation of that is
an appeal to the supernatural okay let's
keep going when
uh a human being uh
repeats a behavior that another human
being
thinks is um unwise
or counterproductive or will not achieve
its purpose
and you ask them or you show them
they will have an explanation which you
might not like
it may be stupid but the ape
perfectly well wants this thing to work
but doesn't know why it is
doing the actions that that's
it's a thing that's that's very hard to
uh um take on board
because we are used to intentional
behavior
and uh we're not used to um
the overt behavior of humans being
unintentional
humans have have um
uh they have
tend to explain themselves even
irrationally
and they act according to their
explanation
whereas uh there's no evidence that any
other animals
have those explanations okay 18 minutes
yes so we've got this
idea there that um humans doing
unwise things are not like
other animals doing unwise things and
i'm an animal that does
the same thing over and over again
hoping for a different result
and not getting it is going to do that
regardless
because they can't learn in the way we
can
and crucially they won't have an
explanation
we will even if a person does an unwise
thing even if they're doing the same
behavior over and over again it's
leading to failure if you were to
question them they'd have an explanation
it might be a false explanation it might
be a bad explanation but they would be
able to give you an account of why
of why they're doing what they're doing
most physicists
don't believe in the everett
interpretation yes that's a
very sad state of affairs that i i'm at
a loss to
explain uh it's a sociological
phenomenon though
not a uh scientific or philosophical
disagreement
it's something has gone wrong just like
something went
very badly wrong with philosophy as a
whole
in the 20th century and and
you know we're still seeing the ripples
from that with with uh
postmodernism and and woke and and what
have you
i worry a bit you're using an argument
from elimination
so all the other views out there which
personally i don't find convincing as an
ammeter but i can certainly see why you
might reject them to me they look
arbitrary
those you reject but the other
physicists who are as trained as you are
some are as skilled as you are
feel the same way about the many worlds
view so what does that just say yes
i i don't think what makes your
intuition better than theirs
uh yes i don't think that's so it's not
a matter of intuition
uh physics got
dominated or contaminated by
uh positivism instrumentalism
and such like bad philosophical theories
towards the beginning end of 19th
century and beginning of the 20th
century
and this uh caused a knock-on effect
um on uh on
on physics it it almost had the same
effect on relativity
but einstein rebelled against it at the
last moment as it were and and said no
it really is true
that there's space time is curved it's
not just that
that uh our brains
think that it's curved or something like
that or that the
the predictions come out right there
really is a curvature in space-time
by the time quantum theory came along a
couple of decades later
positivism instrumentalism and so on had
taken hold
and as a result generations of
physicists
were taught when they were students they
were intimidated
by their professors telling them
things like if you think you understand
this you don't
um there there is no such thing as what
really happened
if you if you ask how did the electron
get
from here to here you're asking an uh
illegitimate question
there is no such thing as how it got
from here to here
there is only a prediction that it got
now when you're taught like that and
intimidated by those kind of things
coming from on high
some proportion of you of your young
people will some will quit
some will take that on board and do the
same to their students in turn
and some will think no that's ridiculous
come on there is there is a thing and
then they discover that
there's an everett interpretation so the
only thing that
i would add to what david has
perfectly well said there at the
28-minute mark about
about why there isn't a majority of
physicists who endorse the multiverse
is just to recognize that this is
only an issue in physics mainly in
theoretical physics
although any any physicist who of course
takes an interest in quantum
physics will have an opinion on this and
we'll will defer
to one explanation or non-explanation or
another
it seems to me in my conversations with
some physicists anyway that
the least
the version of quantum theory that
causes
people the least amount of embarrassment
for want of another word is
instrumentalism shut up and calculate
the idea that you don't want to
have an opinion at all on how to
understand quantum theory
you just say it works and
i can use it to calculate what's going
to happen in these experiments i can
use the formalism i can do the maths and
that
is the sophisticated macho skeptical way
to do things
it's worth noticing that this approach
only happens in physics
and only happens in theoretical physics
really in quantum theory i mean
i did geophysics for a while they're
physicists they don't deny that the
earth exists
they don't deny that there are things in
the ground that the instrumentation
and the mathematical formalism once you
analyze
you know the outcomes of these
experiments you know if the resistivity
survey of the ground
tells you that there is a copper ore in
the ground
there's a copper ore in the ground
they're not going to deny that
that's what the the instrumentation
as interpreted using the mathematics if
that's what it tells you then that's
what's really going on
uh the astrophysicists don't deny that
well these calculations
that say that there's a galaxy off in
that particular direction
well that's just a way of speaking
that's not really a galaxy there okay
the formalism allows us to predict that
that's where the light is coming from
but that's not really going to be a
galaxy there's no sense in which we can
talk about there really being a galaxy
there
no one would talk this way even within
physics let alone chemistry and biology
we admit the reality of these entities
that are causing
the results of these experiments it's
only quantum theory
okay it's only quantum theory let's face
it even even even the standard model i
mean
you know they don't deny everything do
they they don't deny the existence of
the fundamental particles they don't
deny the existence of the electrons but
they
they deny the existence of what's
causing
the interference effects namely
these other entities which exist in
places that we cannot observe
call them other universes and this idea
of the unobserved in science is
just extremely common i mean this is
this is the way science works we can't
observe the center of the star but we
need to
invoke the existence of the center of
the star and fusion reactions going on
there which we can't observe to explain
what we do observe
the light coming from a star or the sun
we can't be there to observe the big
bang but
we observe the effects of the big bang
we can't be there to observe dinosaurs
but we observe fossils so we have to
invoke
the existence in things we can't observe
and
you know the everett multiverse
the universe is in that apart from the
one that we
are in right now that we occupy those
other universes exist
but we can't observe them you know big
deal that that's just
the way that physics that's just the way
that science works
it's explaining what we see what we
observe in terms of what we
cannot observe or do not observe why do
so many professional philosophers
not think so much of karl popper
oh that's a uh so you know you've just
asked me why so many people uh
make fundamental mistakes about
metaphysics within physics why do so
many people
physicists uh
talk nonsense about metaphysics and and
and so on now you're asking me
why do so many philosophers makes
and i said i didn't really know now
you're asking me why do so many
philosophers make make
mistakes i don't know i i've heard a
variety of theories about this
but i don't know and i i'm i haven't
thought all that much about it but
it is definitely the case that
philosophy took a really bad
turn just over 100 years ago and hasn't
really recovered
professional philosophy i mean but say
when i read popper if i look at the
areas i know best that he wrote on
poverty of historicism open society and
its enemies
i find i agree with a very high
percentage of his conclusions
so i'm inclined to like him but i don't
think those are great books i think he's
too obsessed with rebutting crude
marxism
he's very bad at steel manning his
opponents and on a lot of the pages i
just don't find that much insight even
though i'm very sympathetic
toward the conclusions so maybe he's
just not that great a thinker
and that's why most philosophers don't
fall in love with him
uh i i would believe that
if the critiques that i read of him
bore any relation to to his theory
uh the critiques of him are extremely
crude and basically misunderstand
everything
uh i i it's funny you should say i
i i think that he's very good much too
good
at steel manning opponents and this this
relates to your first criticism
that he's he's too obsessed with
refuting not just
marxism but like every
every bad philosophical theory that has
gone before he i think he puts the it
into its best
possible form and then spends pages and
pages and pages
going into every possible good aspect of
that theory he often says
you know he's supposed to be the
greatest critic of the 20th century's
greatest critic of marxism
but he spends pages and pages praising
marx
and it's the same with plato so he i
i think he he would have done better
to explain his own theory more
and not refute not spend so much time
refuting others
but it on the other hand it is his
philosophy it's his philosophical
position
that uh there is no such thing as a
positive argument for something
you have conjectures and then you have
criticism of their opponents
of their of the opposing conjectures you
don't have
positive arguments for your conjectures
uh it's a bit like you you said you were
criticizing me a while ago saying
something like i i was only putting
forward negative arguments well
that's what popper would have us do you
know because
the position that we
hold ourselves and are putting forward
or advocating
we're ready to abandon
the the the thing that that
an argument consists of is on the one
hand a conjecture
and another hand a criticism so you're
saying
the standard way of looking at so-and-so
has got these flaws
i have this conjecture which doesn't
have those flaws
okay that's that's the beginning of an
argument
then someone can say ah but it does or
they could say well it might not have
those flaws but it has these others
flaws
okay so that's how an argument can go
but
it never should go along the lines of
this must be true because
so and so because that is an appeal to
authority
appeal to justification and so on and
and uh the popper is of the of the
opinion so am i
that there are no justifications and and
there are no authorities
okay so at the 35 minute mark or
thereabouts we have
tyler saying among other things that
popper is might not be that great of a
thinker after all the other philosophers
might not like him it's absolutely true
the other philosophers don't like him
and it is
somewhat of a a mystery one one measure
of him being
a good philosopher might precisely be
that
that he is disliked so much by people
steeped in
the justified true belief of knowledge
people steeped
in socialism people who think that
there should be philosopher kings people
who just don't understand
his books like tyler said that they're
that you know
it's not good writing it's hard well
but all philosophy can be regarded
as kind of like this in a sense
you're not going to get necessarily an
entertaining reader depends on what
you're looking for
i suppose you know some people say david
deutsch
writes in such a way that it's not an
easy read
a pop is not needed and yet but i i
sometimes i don't understand this
it's confusing to me because when you
talk to philosophers of course
they love people like wittgenstein who
to me is impenetrable
and insofar as you can get anything out
of him you don't get much out of him
there's not really much that's
interesting there and he contradicts
himself you know the early vidcon sign
the late if he can start
much less even older philosophers
okay once you get back to leibniz and
descartes two philosophers i quite like
along with
human spinoza i think these guys are
great but they're very hard reads it's
all
hard reads and you really have to sit
down and put a lot of effort in to try
and
extract out anything that's worthwhile
because the language can sometimes be
impenetrable
what poppa does as david has correctly
said there is he
gives due to the people that he's trying
to refute he's trying to
solve problems show you what's wrong
with the traditional conceptions in
philosophy
and if you look at just something like
for example
the way in which he figures out solves
the problem of
what democracy is okay what the purpose
of democracy is
why democracy is a better system of
governance than
the alternatives it's because it's not
about trying to figure out who should
rule
okay which which other systems of
governing a society
for example just installing a king as a
tyrannical king
that's a solution to how should society
be ruled
papa says well democracy is not about
that democracy is about figuring out
how to remove rulers and policies more
easily and so he has to give due to the
common understanding and the common
understanding is often
very very deeply entrenched in schooling
and culture in the memes that exist and
so people inherit these
traditional ideas many of them
stretching all the way back to platon
but he stands up against that and so
it's very very hard it's very very much
like everett i suppose there's a good
parallel there
that everett just says well let's just
take literally what the experiments are
telling us what the formalism is telling
us and what they're telling us
is the reality is just so much larger
than what we
imagined we can't observe the vast
majority of it
but what we do observe tells us that the
rest of it exists i mean
just to take things literally rather
than figuratively rather than as
a metaphor for what's going on to take
the mathematics as a metaphor
and so that a lot of people balk at that
idea i suppose and maybe there's
you know some professional jealousy in
the idea that everett got there first
in explaining this and the other
physicist you know who has tried for so
long
to figure out a realistic understanding
quantum theory didn't quite get there
and a lot of the ideas were woo you know
they were superstitious kind of weird
nonsense to a large extent so everett
solves it and maybe people are unhappy
about that and i think that
papa suffers from the same um issues i
mean
what is the nature of knowledge how does
knowledge grow these are these are
arguments that went on for millennia no
one made much progress and then papa
comes along and he just solves it he
just tells us about conjectural
knowledge
and that knowledge doesn't have to mean
justified true belief you know everyone
else
before that was trying to figure out
well how do you justify
your beliefs how do you justify
something as true and this just went on
for millennia
then he just comes along and says well
knowledge isn't that
i can imagine that that you know
very human philosophers are jealous
now i i won't go into the reasons why
but you know i think that there's
some extent to which this this is
happening with david deutch now
um maybe we'll save for a distant
episode but
you know the the truth of the matter is
that when people make progress
there is professional jealousy there can
be this kind
of very human reaction very emotional
reaction that
oh it's that that's so simple it's so
simple
why didn't i think of that well i'm not
going to give him credit for that
like ever it really is simple isn't it
after all i know all that everett is
saying is
well just take it literally you know
we're not going to we aren't going to
consider why it is that the equations
say
that the electron simultaneously
occupies all these positions
uh and yet we know it can't occupy all
these positions so how do we try and get
around that he just says
it says it occupies all these positions
so it occupies all these positions it
really does it's just simple it's just
parsimonious
cut through the nonsense there's your
answer so too with
papa you know so too with just
explaining
a whole bunch of things you know what
how does science demarcate itself
or come to a better understanding of the
world
is it by confirming how much do you have
to confirm how
how long does it take until you're
confident in the truth of your theories
if you're doing experiment he just said
well do away with all that
you know how we demarcate science from
non-science the experiment and if
something's falsifiable
then we've got a testable theory and
that's a part of science and if it's not
falsifiable it's not a part of science
lovely in parsimony it's progress and
people don't give him credit why don't
people give him
credit for that i mean well they do of
course but then they say
either falsification's not good enough
on the one hand or on the other or on
the other it's not how science works
okay and then they go on to the jooheon
coin thesis and they immediately reveal
themselves as having never read pogba in
the first place of course
which is usually the problem you know
look i
i guess that the overwhelming majority
like tylus is there that you know
it's not well respected among
philosophers and that's broadly true
might be changing a little bit but it's
because it's often not assigned in a
significant way
in philosophy courses you know to the
students and so if the students aren't
reading him
they're not inclined to go on and teach
him when they become philosophy
lecturers and professors themselves
and so it's no mystery therefore that
that he doesn't have the
kind of academic social cachet that he
deserves
i would say even though he's solving all
these problems okay that's enough
defense of papa let's keep going so if
say
an eight-year-old who is not being
physically abused wanted to run away
from home
that child would have the right to do so
it's the same kind of question that used
to be asked
about democracy uh
before viable democracies were
implemented
that is people used to say
in many kinds of dispute
only one thing can be done the different
people have different views
uh someone a b c d e but only one of
them can be done
and therefore the others have to be
uh prevented from getting their way
and if you have a democracy then that
that all that means is it's
exactly like having a monarchy or a
tyranny except that the monarch or
tyrant
is 51 percent of the people so obviously
when you have a democracy
51 percent of the people will vote to
dispossess the 49 of the people
and indeed if you just impose voting
um in isolation from other institutions
that is exactly what happens but
if you institute voting as part
of a sophisticated system of
um error correction and um
uh uh institutions of criticism
and you gradually introduce it there
it simply doesn't have that property it
doesn't happen
so now you're saying well now david you
will say
do you think that 51 of the people
um have the right to
dispossess the other 49
well it's the wrong question i mean
there are circumstances where they do
it it depends but what you shouldn't be
asking that you should be asking
what institutions are determining the
answer
do they respect human rights are they
rational do they expect impossible forms
of knowledge
to be in the hands of the powerful okay
so around the 50-minute mark we have
tyler asking a question about you know
should an eight-year-old be allowed to
run away from home for example
and david gives a long answer which is
uh basically about democracy it's a
comparison to democracy
but that the key thing that he says is
you have to ask about how this situation
arose and that's what i would say it's
like
well you know enacting
the taking children seriously philosophy
is not one day you know
an eight-year-old has been raised in the
traditional way
the way that almost every child has been
raised more or less
and the next day you just invent tcs for
your family
that's not going to work that's a recipe
for disaster tcs
is a sophisticated theory of raising
children which would require
one to either gradually begin to enact
it if
the child has already been born or
from the moment the child is born
enacted and have a good understanding of
it
it does not entail enabling the child to
just
make every single error regardless of
the safety of the child
a tcs is a way of lovingly
and with care raising a child without
coercion
it is not and this is the common
misconception it is not
as david talks about with freedom just
absolute
anarchy for the child where there are
there's no knowledge
there in that family or with that child
in other words should you just let the
child run away
on tcs the answer is no does that entail
coercion
no because you have hit the two
been coercing them every single day
in some way shape or form causing them
to want to run away so that's your fault
so far that you've created this
environment in which the child wants to
run away from you
and now suddenly you want to blame tcs
for not allowing you to stop them
that makes no sense okay so this is a
complete nut and misunderstanding
tcs tcs is like physics it takes
quite a bit of knowledge to really grok
what's going on
with that philosophy like with any
philosophy like with any claim about how
reality either is or should
be and it can't just be reduced to
complete and utter anarchy for everyone
all the time
that's not what it is okay let's keep
going so
if somebody was watching the earth from
a distant galaxy with a
powerful telescope they would see that
this planet
alone among all the other planets in the
galaxy as far as we know you know
maybe there are many inhabited planets
in which case they would all have this
property
and none of the other planets do the
ones which have explanatory knowledge on
them
can deflect asteroids but
if i were nietzsche and i heard this i
would say you're making
the importance of being explanatory
subordinate to some notion of the will
to power
i don't mean that in a critical way but
is that a misunderstanding
well uh so power is a is an
ambiguous term usually um
and especially with these with these uh
romantic philosophers
it means power over humans no i don't
mean that but nietzsche also meant it
more broadly right
uh well i haven't read that so i'll take
your word for that
okay um the will to have an effect
is part of the will to solve problems
so we are um uh
born with a a repertoire of
ideas which include expectations
and desires and so on which are horribly
inadequate
and conflict with each other and uh
conflict with the world as well
and but we uh have the ability to alter
and augment those uh
theories and one of that one of the
things we do is
we affect the world around us so as to
make it more the way we want it
okay so tyler there mentions nietzsche's
will to power which is this you know
supposed to be the motivating force
in people and whatever the case okay
let's just
not worry too much about the details the
will to power is that people want to be
powerful they want to have power over
the universe whatever
it's used as a pejorative it's as if
this is a bad thing in a way
now there could be all sorts of bad ways
in which power might be used
of one person over another but
the idea that our explanatory knowledge
won't allow us to fight off the
hostility of the universe in order to
allow
us to survive in anything we care about
to survive that somehow this is a bad
thing
is wrong it's just a pessimistic view of
people
as always you know there's just this
common idea that any time
someone comes along and says we should
solve problem x
someone else will say well that's going
to damage the environment or it's going
to have negative effects
y and z well yes of course for any
particular solution
new problems are going to be created but
that doesn't mean we should stop
it doesn't mean we should think
ourselves evil because of the fact that
some of our solutions cause let's say
pollution the pollution that we're
dealing with on a natural earth
anyway is so much worse than anything
that we're going to create
people think about the natural
environment as being this pristine clean
place that is hospitable for
people but it's not it's not we've
learned this
via the beginning of infinity that in
fact the
universe is implacably hostile and we
eke out in existence
on only certain places on the earth and
we have to use technology
in order to keep ourselves safe and if
we can use our power
our power to create explanations in
order to
spread out into the universe survive and
make the place much
nicer than what it is supernovas aren't
nice
black holes aren't nice inhospitable
moons around
distant planets aren't nice if we can
use our knowledge to create the
technology to make place hospitable
for people of the future and even for
animals of the future
then isn't that good okay some people
come along and say oh this is the will
to power
well it's just a negative view of humans
but
that's the zeitgeist that's been the
zeitgeist for
well a long time now and david deutsch
is one of the few people
standing up against it okay last clip
let's
let's go so if you call that power
then it is power but i would rather call
it something that
arises naturally in physics in the same
way that gravity does
you may as well say gravity is a theory
about power
well yes and no gravity is a theory
about how the universe is
uh the the the asteroid is
pulled towards the earth by gravity and
pushed away
by explanatory power and you if you want
to understand
what makes asteroids and planets do what
they do
you cannot do it without understanding
explanations
but you can do it without understanding
a whole load of other attributes of
humans including
um the ability to suffer and and uh
the fact that we're a featherless biped
okay
one minute one hour and five minutes and
30 seconds david makes the
amazing claim that i don't think i've
emphasized enough really that um
that knowledge is just explanatory
knowledge is just an outworking of the
laws of physics as well
you know and this is this is just a
subset of saying you know the
distinction between the natural and the
unnatural
is artificial we are part of the natural
environment we humans have evolved
therefore explanatory our brains which
are capable of creating
running minds which create explanatory
knowledge are natural they're just
natural as well it's all natural
by this standard of it exists in the
universe and it has arisen by natural
processes
but of course if you say it's unnatural
if you say what we do is unnatural
well then you you immediately go down
the road of saying we are indeed special
we are these special unique
entities in the universe and that's true
as well so on the one hand
natural just an outworking of the laws
of physics and if you want to explain
what happens to asteroids that are
heading towards the earth
are they going to be attracted to the
earth by gravity or repelled from the
earth by
technology and explanatory knowledge and
so this is why
explanatory knowledge as it turns out is
like i've said before it's almost like
people are
a force of nature
we are the thing that is transforming at
the moment just locally
our planet and tiny parts of our planet
but eventually the entire galaxy
eventually the universe we spread out
and we
transform the rest of physical reality
which makes us kind of like you know
gravity and this is why david says you
know
we shouldn't uh have this weird negative
view that there's one part of nature
namely anything that we do that is bad
and everything else being natural is
okay why aren't we natural
why are we unnatural it's a very
religious notion to say that
uh we're the uniquely evil bad part of
reality when actually we're the thing
that is trying to make everything better
we're not deliberately out there trying
to make things worse
trying to make things better given the
way british elections
seem to have been running that the
tories win every time
does that mean the error correction
mechanism of the british system of
government now is weaker
uh no unfortunately the um
[Music]
uh so as you probably know i i favor the
first past the post system
in the in the purest possible form as it
is
implemented in britain i think that is
the most error correcting
possible electoral system although i
must add that
the electoral system is only a tiny
facet
of the institutions of criticism and
consent
in general it's it's it's just a tiny
thing but it is the best one
it's not perfect uh
it it has some of the defects of for
example proportional representation
proportional representation has the
defect that it causes coalitions
all the time coalitions are bad but you
have a delegated monitor with the
coalition right
with a coalition say in the netherlands
which is richer than
united kingdom you typically have
coalition governments
some parties in the coalition are
delegated monitors of the other parties
parties are better informed than voters
so isn't that a better preparation
mechanism for error correction
no so
if we're looking at particular cases
we're going to get bogged down
into what you attribute to what because
we're not doing experiments with these
things
we we have we don't have a control group
uh we don't we don't have
uh agreed upon method of deciding
what is being tested and and then we we
test
different things at different times and
and never under the same conditions
okay so just last point here that point
on first past the post you know people
in australia as well as everywhere else
i think uh
think that there's some sort of virtue
with proportional representation
this allows the minor parties to
actually get a foot in and to have
some representation the problem with
this is as david points out what you end
up
with is coalitions such that the third
party has a disproportionate amount of
power and this
leads to compromises and compromises
have an undeservedly high reputation
among people
as david says in the beginning of
infinity a compromise is certainly
better than
immediate violence between people but in
the normal case where
the whole point of politics is
supposedly diplomacy is supposed to
avoid violence instead of having
tribal warfare you actually have
discussions and debates
if you have a coalition then what you've
got is a major party and a minor party
and the minor party
can actually cause the major party to do
things that they otherwise would not
have done
and this seems to be unfair because that
minor party has
substantially less votes than the first
most popular party and the second most
popular party so therefore that
small minority of people end up getting
legislation through that the
second largest group of people don't
they don't get to try out what they want
but it's often worse than this it's
often worse than this if you do have two
parties in a coalition
this minor party then may not get
precisely what it wants but what it will
do is affect the legislation of the
major party
it will affect the legislation of the
major party in such a way that instead
of the
major part in getting its policy enacted
turned into a law let's call that policy
x that policy x never actually gets
through to becoming a law it never gets
voted on
instead the major party and the minor
party do a deal
and they come up with a compromise that
isn't x
instead it's it's some compromised
policy called y
and this compromise policy y i'm going
to call it y
isn't what the major party wants exactly
it isn't what the minor party wants
exactly it's a mishmash of the both
and so when they turn it into a law and
it fails or something goes wrong
then the major party doesn't learn
anything because they will say
to the minor party and to everyone else
in the population that's not the
that's not the policy we wanted in the
first place we told you the policy that
we wanted
but we were in coalition with the minor
party so we had to invent this other
policy which we didn't really want
we thought it would fail we thought that
x was the policy that was going to work
and the minor party says well we always
thought that we shouldn't have that
policy y
either we didn't want x we didn't want y
we wanted the policy that we
truly believed in but that never got
enacted either nothing that anyone
believes in
actually got enacted instead the
mishmash compromise policy got enacted
and so when it fails no one learns
anything
and everyone just retreats back to their
original positions the major party
retreats to position x if x actually got
enacted and tried
for a few years perhaps until the time
of the next election
then the citizenry can decide whether or
not that policy was a good policy or not
and then vote knowing
that the policies and the thoughts and
the ideas of the people
in that major party we're actually worth
voting for in first place and this is
why first pastor post works is why
a two-party system is better than this
multiplicity of parties
because if you have a multiplicity of
parties you never actually get policies
being acted that
um any of them truly truly endorse
okay this was a wonderful conversation i
really enjoyed um
the um the the way that tyler has gone
about
questioning david i think there's a
whole bunch of misconceptions there
david's
um uh david's ideas like poppers like
everett's they're very hard to
understand without um serious study but
that study of course is
fun hopefully that's one reason that i i
exist
doing this is to try and um uh unpack
some of this stuff so i hope that this
was um
a valuable in to some extent thanks
again to aaron for suggesting this
and i'll see you again soon bye